+++
title = 'Freudian View on Sexuality'
date = 2024-06-03T14:07:22+05:45
draft = false
tags = ['sexuality']
description = "This note tries to study Freud’s theory of sexuality, and tries to gain a new perspective on homosexuality and sexual inversion."
+++
`28th May, 2024 @Brahma` #sexuality

## Summary
This note tries to study Freud’s theory of sexuality, and tries to gain a new perspective on homosexuality and sexual inversion.

[Freud's Three Essays on Sexuality](https://www.sas.upenn.edu/~cavitch/pdf-library/Freud_SE_Three_Essays_complete.pdf)


## Take-away
 
Sexual inversion and homosexuality is a function of the libido or the sexual drive. There is no concrete answer as to why inversion occurs, but that it’s natural, seen in many civilizations, and is not degenerate. There are three types of inverts, which we now know as gay, and bisexual, the third one being a variation of bisexual. Inversion is neither innate or fully external. There may be some inclinations innate in a child, but it’s very hard to pin point the exact reason. Characteristics of opposite sex may be seen in inverts but that is hardly substantial. Psychic Hermaphroditism fails to explain homosexuality, but may contribute towards a foundation of trans-sexuality. Homosexuality was present abundantly during ancient times, in which older, masculine men opted to take teenage, feminine boys as lover (exact cause to be researched). Sexual activity may not be the sole aim of inverts. Sexual object is a selection and function of sexual instinct.


## Points
 
1)  ‘*Libido*’  is used as a scientific term to express sexual drive and hunger of humans and animals alike. Analogous to “hunger” for food, animals experience a libido for sex.
2) Popular opinion describe that libido is generally absent in childhood, manifests itself in puberty with onset of maturity, and it’s goal is sexual union. It’s also believed that libido is felt by one sex towards the opposite sex.
3) Freud rejects these popular opinion, and goes further to assert that these statements give a very false picture of libido, its object, and its end goal.
4) The one for whom one feels the libido, or from whom sexual attraction proceeds towards another is the ‘*Sexual Object*’ (simply put, sexual object is anything towards whom one is attracted towards); and the act towards which the libido points, or the end goal of the sexual attraction is termed the ‘*Sexual aim*’
5) Phenomena where one’s sexual object and sexual aim is pointed towards member of the same sex is called *Inversion*.
6) Those who experience inversion are ‘*inverts*’

### Inversion

1) Three types of inverts: absolute inverts (homosexuals), amphegenic inverts (bisexuals), and Contingents (opportunists)
2) Heterosexual activities induce aversion in absolute inverts, and they are unable to either engage in, or derive no satisfaction from heterosexual activities
3) Contingent inverts are normally heterosexual, but may engage in or derive satisfaction from homosexual relationship in case of unavailability of partners. It’s induce by external factors. 
4) The timeline of inversion is variable: one may have noticed oneself as an invert as far back as his memory reaches, or just with the onset of puberty. Point is, there is no surety. Sometimes inversion is periodic. Sometimes one may feel his libido directed towards one of his own sex, while at other times he may be aroused by one from another sex. [[#^obj1|see objection 1]]
5) Inversion may even show itself after a long time of heterosexuality.
6) Early assessment regarded inversion as an **innate** indication of nervous degeneracy.
7) They observed that many inverts were also suffering from nervous diseases.
8) They also categorized inversion as innate—something you’re born with—and degeneration—a term applied to describe any disorder not caused due to trauma or infection.
9) Freud rejects that classifying inversion as degeneracy achieves anything. If anything, it shuts discussion and proper analysis on this topic. Furthermore, Freud says there are two conditions for anything to be considered degeneracy:
	1) Significant differences and deviations from normal behaivour
	2) Serious impairment in conducting daily life and unable to complete ordinary functions
10) Freud also gives arguments regarding why inversion can’t be considered degeneracy. He says that in addition to not meeting the aforementioned two criteria, inverts are usually extremely capable, and antiquity had delegated to them important roles within the society. Furthermore, inversion is extremely common in both civilized and uncivilized society, where degeneracy is a concept only prevalent in “civilized” ones.
11) Innateness of homosexuality is seen in only absolute inverts. And that too, it’s based on the testimony of inverts themselves: the testimony that at no point in their life did they felt attraction towards one of the opposite sex. [[Is sexuality innate?]]
12) The restriction of innateness of homosexuality to only absolute inverts and not to the other two types of inverts is hard to reconcile. This theory expounds inversion is only innate in absolute inverts and acquired in other two inverts. It fails to provide an universal theory of inversion. See [[Search for Universality and its precarious nature]]
13) Freud, however believes inversion is acquired or due to environmental reasons. In his very Freudian outlook, he gives three reasons:
	1) One can always point out, even in the case of absolute inverts, a certain incident in one’s childhood, which had such a strong sexual impression that it affected the child
	2) Very close relationship with ones of same-sex may cause inversion—even late in life
	3) Inversion can be “*fixed*” by hypnotic suggestion. See: [[Is hypnosis real?]] and [[#^obj2|see objection 2]]
14) Freud doubts the existence of innate inversion. He points out that many experts believed if subjects displaying innate inversion were examined more thoroughly, there must be some incidents in his childhood which may have affected the direction of his libido. Furthermore, even if the subject has no recollection of such incident in his conscious memory, under appropriate influence the situation may be unearthed. Also, he cites various authors as having opinion that inversion is just variation of sexual drive and can be explain fully with external circumstances. [[#^obj3|see objection 3]]
15) He rejects both fully innate and fully external explanations for inversion.
16) Somatic Hermaphroditism is an interesting jab at explaining inversion. According to it, we humans used to have organs of both sexes in our body, but gradually started to separate off into unisex organism. Vestige of such an age exists in such in rare cases of true hermaphroditism where a person has genitals of both sexes. Similarly, it was believed a kind of psychic hermaphroditism existed, which could explain the prevalence of inversion. After all, if it can manifest itself biologically after such a long time, maybe it manifested itself in the psyche more often. However, Freud rejects this idea on the grounds that if such were true, we must need see some biological hermaphroditism accompanying the psychic one. [[#^obj4|see objection 4]]
17) Discussion of Secondary and Tertiary Sexual characteristics are analyzed but there is no consistency over such characteristics. Freud agrees that various characteristics of the opposite sex are seen in inverts with much regularity, but that is true also for non-inverts. The point is behavior and characteristics of opposites sexes are seen in each much with much regularity without any indication of inversion.
18) Theory of Psychical hermaphroditism can’t work because if such were the case, changes in other mental faculties should have been evident. However not only is that not the case, a man can be fully masculine and fully an invert. Only in cases of women does Freud find any such “hermaphroditism” of other mental faculties.
19) There was a lot of confusion about inversion, sexuality, and behavior. Things such as tomboy and feminine men were often confused with being homosexuals. The distinction wasn’t really observed.  
20) It seems that Freud also indicates a proto-trans-sexuality theory. According to a male invert, bisexuality—which is now more appropriately named “trans-sexuality”—felt like having a woman’s brain in a male’s body.
21) There is no male or female brain.
22) The theory of Psychical Hermaphroditism presupposes that an male invert is like a woman in every part of his mental faculty—that he acts like woman, likes things a woman might like, and is attracted by what a woman is attracted. Only difference between him and a woman is his genital. This can’t apply to homosexuality, however it is a very strong foundation for trans-sexuality. Most of the arguments today regarding gender-affirming surgery is based upon the argument that the subject feels their body is not their own. That everything about them is a woman (or a man) and that female mind is housed in a male body. [[Did we just revive Psychical Hermaphroditism?]]
23) Obviously, Freud rejects the this claim of PS as their are many male inverts with every masculine inclinations, except for their sexual object.
24) What is weird is in this whole paper is there seem to have existed “*[[Femboys]]*” for all of recorded history. During ancient times, in Greece and Rome, older, masculine inverts—with no other “womanly” tendencies, would frequently take young, teenage boys as lovers (see [[Baccha-bazi]]), dressing them as a girl would dress. They even preferred bodies with womanly characteristics. The more feminine, more the attraction. The crucial part is that no matter how womanly the boy is, he must have male genitals. That is the fundamental requirement. Every other thing is just adornment. Also, that attraction was purely for womanly characteristics. Boys who needed help, who needed protection. It may have been power-play type of thing, there the sexual satisfaction, indeed an overall mental satisfaction, is brought about by being the provider, or by being the one is charge. This fails however to account for why they didn’t take teenage girls as lovers. They would’ve been more submissive. It seems they preferred male genitals. It may be argued that the proliferation of homosexuality in ancient times was caused due to lack of women, or over-protectiveness of their fathers (see [[Homosexuality due to lack of Women in Ancient times?]]). This is most probable, as teenage boys had to prove themselves. They were considered independent relatively early—15 in Sparta—so older men had more ready access to adolescent boys. The attraction only persisted till the sexual objects were teenagers however. Once they manifested “manly” characteristics, the older men would take new lovers. The teenage kid may himself take younger boys as lovers once he reached sufficient. All this doesn’t sound like inversion. It may just be that due to lack of women, they opted for teenage boys. But that doesn’t explain the compulsion of male genitals in the potential sexual object. Further questions arise from this view. Do we consider the teenage boy to be an invert during the period of molestation?
25) This is a bit different in female inverts. While male inverts can display masculine characteristics while having other males as their sexual object, a female invert is almost always, according to Freud, masculine. She looks for more submissive female partners which is in stark contrast with that of male inverts. Specifically, male inverts look for traits of the opposite sex—meek, subservient, submissive, needing protection—in members of the same sex. However, female inverts look for those same traits of the same sex in their potential sexual object. Freud is careful, however, as he qualifies as only *active* female inverts displaying masculine characteristics. [[#^obj5|see objection 5]]
26) Lesbians are extremely attracted to each other’s lips and contact of genitals with the mount. [[#^obj6|see objection 6]]
27) The sexual goal of inverts is ambiguous. Though male inverts prefer the anal orifice and lesbians the lips, oftentimes, attainment of sexual goals is completed simply by emotional out pour or conversation, without any sexual act. 
28) Sexuality is determined at or during puberty. [[#^obj7|see objection 7]]
29) Freud admits he didn’t find any satisfactory cause for inversion, but believes this study contributed to a more thorough understanding of inverts.
30) Furthermore, a important point that he makes is that sexual instinct is not only independent, but actually the driving factor toward a sexual object. Specifically, it’s not the sexual object that arouses sexual instinct in us, but rather the sexual instinct which attaches itself upon a sexual object. I believe this has huge implications. If we explain love the same way, it’s not that the emotion of Love is envoked in us by a love interest, but the feeling of love that latches itself upon a suitable love interest. Furthermore, Sexual interest is opaque: it doesn’t prefer one sex to another.



## Objections
 
1) It may just have been bisexuality. If a bisexual finds a very attractive woman, his inversion may seem like it “went away”. However, It’s still there. Just that there is no need for it to be manifest. For example, if you have a very beautiful girlfriend, there is no need for you to direct you libido towards any other woman. Same may be true of these “*oscillatory inverts*”. If the subject is actually repulsed by inversion during these oscillatory periods, then may be the point can be made, however, Freud doesn’t clarify if that’s what he meant. ^obj1
2) I actually believed it to be bullshit when I first read it but I came across a paper [[#^e3b3eb|(2)]] that claimed it to be true. Haven’t researched it thoroughly but the study with 15 subjects saw significant correlation between depth of hypnosis achieved and improvement over homosexual tendencies. This paper was however published in 1967 and prejudices prevalent in that time may have contributed to such findings. Furthermore, it’s widely considered now that ‘*conversion therapy*’ doesn’t work. [[#^1afa32|(3)]] ^obj2
3)  Well, if you look for patterns, you will find it. If you look into a invert’s childhood, it’s almost guaranteed that you’ll find something to explain the inversion. And I believe this is a very large problem of psychoanalysis and Freud. He tries and claims to explain our life and our inner-most desires with some childhood trauma, but fails to account that such things very easy to find if you look hardly enough. Even in non-inverts there may be cases of certain sexual impression, and yet the child turns out heterosexual. This argument I believe suffers from the same problem that Freud accused of the proponents of innateness of inversion: that it can’t be universalized. Same situation in two different children produce two different outcomes: in one homosexuality, in another heterosexuality. That’s exactly what Freud gets to eventually. ^obj3
4) The objection here is not with the premise of biological hermaphroditism (although I very much doubt this theory), but on Freud’s grounds for rejecting it. It explains that psychic hermaphroditism must be accompanied by biological one. However, there is no reason why that should be the case. If the premise is taken to be true, maybe such hermaphroditism manifests itself on the biological level sometimes while sometimes it manifests itself on the mental level. As Freud admits, they must be independent. Therefore, biological hermaphroditism in ancient times may be cause for inversion currently seen without the biological hermaphroditism actually being manifest physically today.  ^obj4
5) I believe Freud confuses homosexuality with trans-sexuality during these discourses. Tendencies and behaviors are separate from inversion, which he admits, but nevertheless spends quite some time reconciling it. A female invert may be both masculine and feminine, a male invert may also be both. In case of males it’s easier to discern this. Those with masculine tendencies tend  to be “*top*” and those with feminine tendencies tend to be “*bottom*.” It’s more difficult to distinguish that in lesbians as there is no such clear display of power. That is not to say it doesn’t exist: “strap-on” and the operator of the “dildo” may be said to be in a more dominant position than the one receiving it. Moreover, there is no prolonged display of such tendencies, neither surety of their continuation. A male may be top at one time, and switch to be a bottom in another. Same case with women. They may exchange strap-on multiple times during the sexual act. ^obj5
6) Lesbians may prefer or show a greater attraction towards kissing and licking on both the lips and the genitals simply due to absence of satisfactory tools for the completion of sexual gratification—especially in Freud’s time. A dildo was not well made (see [[History of Dildo]]), strap-ons were unheard of. There may be some objection such as the availability of fingers and hands. However, the tongue provides much great range of motion than hands: they are softer—especially important when stimulating clitoris, and are wet and fluid which facilitate smooth continuance of sexual activity.   ^obj6
7) Most probably false.  ^obj7


## [[To Read Further]]
 
1) Magnan’s Classification of Degenerates
2) Roper, P. “The effects of hypnotherapy on homosexuality.” _Canadian Medical Association journal_ vol. 96,6 (1967): 319-27. ^e3b3eb
3) Higbee, M., Wright, E. R., & Roemerman, R. M. (2022). Conversion Therapy in the Southern United States: Prevalence and Experiences of the Survivors. Journal of Homosexuality, 69(4), 612–631. https://doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2020.1840213 ^1afa32
